Okay! In this video, we are going to take a
look at data types inside of MySQL. Kind
of important discussion to have. We've
been seeing them in use already but I
haven't purposely did not dive into them
too deep because I felt it'd be a little
too confusing. But it's getting to the
point in the course where we do need to
start talking about these different data
types available inside of MySQL. MySQL
does do a very good job of supporting
the ANSI SQL standard data types.
Just to recap, a data type is going to
define what a column is inside the
database, whether it is text, a number, a
date. There's a number of
different types in there. They all
have different properties and to those
types and there's times that you want to
use one over another. So in this video
we're going to go and explain exactly what
those data types are. We can break
them down to about five categories there.
We have Numeric Data Type, it's dealing
with numbers. Date and Time Data Types
that's going to be temporal data. String,
that's going to be simple text. Spatial
Data Types, this deals with the
places and things like that. So I'll
slide specifically on Spatial Data Types.
And then finally, we have in JSON Data
Types. We're going to go through
and look at each one of these closer in
this video. So first up, we have the
Numeric data types. You can see here on
the left column. I have the actual data
type. This is what you're going to be
using in SQL, whether it's an Integer or
INT. That's kind of like an alias. Now
this is going to take up four bytes
inside the database, so I'm going to explain
that in just a minute if you don't
understand with a byte is. Integer is going
to be a simple integer, a number without
decimals. You can see over here, I
have a min and max value. This is an
ANSI datatype. Finally, we have TINYINT,
SMALLINT, MEDIUMINT. You can see these are
different specifications of a number
without any decimals but it affects the
maximum size. When dealing with
integers and the data base restrictions,
one thing you need to keep in mind is if
you try to put in integer that's too big,
the database often will just truncate
it and not tell you. So not exactly
desired behavior. It gotcha. That can
happen. Then we
have a BIGINT. This is for a very
big number. You can see there the min and max
is that with the scientific notation,
there. That means big number. And then we
have FLOATS and DOUBLES. These are
floating points. What's important
here, it's kind of how computers work, if
you're doing highly complex math and
doing a lot of highly complex calculations.
Floating points, when you start getting
into a lot of decimal places, it's not
going to be exact ,so you can get some
variations there. A very small variations
but that is important to understand. It's
kind of funny how computers work that
way. But then, we also have decimal and
numeric. These are actually stored as a
String inside the database. This
gives you a fixed decimal point
and also this is where you're going to
be doing like calculations with money.
That's where you want to be using a
decimal datatype. Oherwise, you could run
into unpredictable errors. This isn't
just a MySQL feature programming
languages such as Java also run into
this. Inexperienced people, when they
start doing calculations with these
values, you can start getting very small
errors and not be able to trace back why
and it's because of this. So important to
know. There's a rule thumb, if you have
a number and you want pick out the
integer tiny small or medium or big int
depending on how much room you need for
that number, you don't want to grab a
type that's too big for a number. That's
never going to get that big because
effectively you're just going to be
wasting space in your database. So
try to do as small as possible but also
be aware of the consequences of not
doing it. Like I said, if you're
dealing with financial calculations,
definitely be using a DECIMAL or NUMERIC data type.
Next up, we have Date and Time Data Types
or temporal data types. These are
pretty straightforward. So we have a DATE
that is just a date value. No time
component. This is an ANSI value. Then
we have DATETIME. As far as I know,
this is now an ANSI data type. But you
can see, when we go from DATE to
DATETIME, we get a large jump in the number
of bytes that are consumed to store that
value. Now TIMESTAMP, the trick here this
also stores date and time but it gets
converted to UTC, so Universal time. So
basically, the timezone gets lopped off.
What's going to happen underneath the
covers is your database session is going
to have a time zone so it's going to get
stored in UTC and then pulled out of the
database and convert it to your local
time zone. So it's something to be aware
of because if you're working with
another system with a different time
zone that's being registered with a
database you can get two different times
out of the database but that's because
it's going to be converted to your
sessions time zone. Next up, we have TIME.
This is a special value so this can be
time of day or an elapsed period of time.
This is also an ANSI data type. AND then
a year here is pretty self-explanatory.
MySQL can hail from 1901 to 2155.
I'm not quite sure why they did that
but that's from the MySQL documentation.
I have a footnote here that MySQL 5.6.4
or greater can also store
fractional seconds. This is going
to be on time, datetime, and timestamp.
This is an optional configuration on.
And you have to be on that level of
database our newer for this. Just be
aware that if you do start turning
fractional seconds, it is going to
increase the storage requirements from 0
to 3 bytes depending on the precision
that you specify in the column
definition.
Now, we've been talking about bytes. I
also need to talk about character sets.
So, a quick recap here, I don't know your
level of familiarity with computers in
general and how things are driven. But
computers really drive off of binary
information so everything inside the
computer is going to be a 1 or a 0, so on
or off. A bit is a binary value of 1
or 0, and then, a byte is going to be a
collection of 8 bits. So very important
to recognize this. You saw how I was
talking about the storage requirements
and bytes of these data values and
that's how much space is going to take
up on your hard drive or in memory for
this to be stored. So important to
understand, if you're dealing with a lot
of data, your storage optimization
becomes very very important. I've seen a
lot change in the last 20 years with
computers and we do have storage is very
cheap now compared to what it was at one
point in time now. Now, we can get a lot
of space but it's still a concern on
getting very large data sets in the
database. You do still want to be optimal
when you're storing things and be aware
of what's going on underneath the covers.
I started the slide talking about
character sets. This is how these
bits become bytes and how those bytes
become something like a letter.
So the original character set was ASCII
some people say ASCII two but I've
always called it ASCII which stands for
American Standard Code for Information
Exchange. This is like one of the first
character sets out there. It was limited
to 128 characters mostly letters, numbers,
and common punctuation.
The problem with ASCII is that it was
only 128 characters, so it just did not
work for international languages. Things
where you have special characters like
the Russian language, which has a lot of
crazy characters in it compared to what
this is in English. So, we started coming
up with different character sets. There's
a lot of different character sets out
there. This is a very complex and
confusing topic but the most popular one
out there is probably UTF-8. This is
used for email and also the web. It's a
number one character
set used on the web. Depending on the
character, it is one to four bytes long
and it gives us a 1,112,064 characters,
so a
very large characters. A very robust
character set. This handles all
the international requirements. If you
remember, when people start texting if
you had an iPhone and you're texting
with somebody with an Android, they
sent you a little emoji character.
Sometimes they'd come up as a question
mark or blank or something like that.
That's because the two phones are using
different character sets and those little
emojis are not always translated between
the two. So just an example where things
can go wrong on character sets. Now I
bring that up. Got into character sets
because when you talk to them about when
we're doing storing String data types. So
first up is character CHAR. This is
going to be stored in the database so
you're going to declare a character. They
had to type of like char (5) there in my
example. What's important to remember
is if you do that and you store a
three-letter word like foo into that,
what's going to happen is MySQL is
going to store foo space space in  the
database, and then when it
retrieves it out of the database, it's
going to lop off the trailing spaces. Now
VARCHAR is similar but the key
characteristics of varchar is that
it's going to be a variable length
string that you can store in the
database. So you can store a word or
group of words into the database and a
VARCHAR is not restricted to that.
While you get a little storage
optimization there because you do have
the length of the the varchar that
you're put in there. But then, you get
a plus one. This is good for where you
have varying length stuff. VARCHAR
is a very very common to use. Now we have
BINARY and VARBINARY. These are
like CHAR and VARCHAR but one is
fixed length and one is variable length.
The key to the binary values, as these
are going to be stored as a binary
character set. So when we set up the
database, the database is going to have a
default character set. We have not had to
do that so far in the course because
there are default setup for that but
we can override those.
Sometimes you need to sometimes you
don't. But what's important to remember
here is the difference between the char
and the varchar. These are going to
be stored with a character set
information where the binary stuff is
going to be stored without character set.
It's going to be stored with a character
set of binary. Next up is we have a BLOB.
This is a binary large object.
So again, this is going to be stored as
binary. You can store text in there. You
can I also use this to store images
inside the database. So if I have a web
application, you can store in the binary
encoding of an image file into the
database. TEXT is like a BLOB, but this is
a non binary String. This is going to
be similar to a CHAR or VARCHAR and
probably closer to a VARCHAR because
this is for a very large text operation.
Next up is we have an ENUM or an
enumeration. This is going to be a
collection of String literals. I got
an example here. You would literally have
red, blue, and green. Then in that
column, that database column, would be
restricted to one of those values. Now
a SET, the very last one that we have here
to talk about. This is very simpler
to ENUM but it is String values but
that column can have one or more values on
that. So an ENUM is one and only one from
those defined values, where I can have
more than one. So I personally have never
used a SET. I've never had a need for it.
But enumerations are very handy. So these
are very very handy things to have
inside the database to set up a list of
values that you want. Next, we have
Spatial Data Types. This first bullet
point is right out of the MySQL
documentation. The Open Geospatial
Consortium is an international consortium
of more than 250 companies, agencies, and
universities participating in the public
development available conceptional
solutions that can be useful with all
kinds of applications that manage
spatial data . So that's kind of a
mouthful there. Basically, the spatial
data is going to be defining points on a
map. It is a good way to think of it. So
if you remember basic navigation
we have longitude and
latitude and different things so this is
a very complex piece of information here.
What it can be used for is doing
searches inside the database. If you have
like postal codes and you want to find a
store near you, you can run queries
using geospatial features. This is pretty
niche, not widely used with MySQL. So, at
this time, I'm not going to be covering
this inside the course but I want you to
be aware of the spatial data types. But I
honestly I know what's out there I just
don't know a lot of people using them.
Next up, we have any JSON Data Type.
JSON stands for JavaScript object
notation. This is a complex structured
document which contains properties and
values. I do have an example to show
you on the next slide here. The
storage of a JSON document is going to
be very similar to a blob or text data
type as far as how much is it going to
be consumed inside the database. What's
important to remember is that MySQL
is going to take the JSON that
you're giving it and convert it to an
internal format that's internal to MySQL
but this can be optimized for storage
and searching and in a operation so the
database has to do on it. But because
it gets converted and then brought back
out, some of the formatting if you have
spacing in the JSON document that
could change. The ordering of properties
could change and that is something
that you really shouldn't be depending
on having property so specific order
won't when working with JSON anyways.
But something to be aware of when you're
dealing with JSON. And then, MySQL
also supports searching of JSON document
properties so you can go in and search
the database for a specific field. You
know JSON document and then
MySQL also allows you to
update a portion of JSON document so
you can go in and update a JSON
property without having to replace the
entire JSON document. So a nice feature
of this. At this point in time, I'm
not planning on covering the JSON
Data Type inside of MySQL in the course.
If there's demand for it, I will. I know
it's a capability of MySQL but I
personally have never used it. I work
with JSON all the time, but usually in
my programming when I'm programming in
Java, I'm going to breed in the Java Script
or the JSON object, read it into Java, I
get the properties I want, and store
those into the database. So it's pretty
rare that I would store an actual
JSON document into the database. But
that's just the use cases that I've had.
If there's demand in the course file, I
may add that in a future date.
Now here's the JSON example. This is
just a literally googled JSON example.
This is one of the examples that I
found. This is a well structured JSON
document. You can see there, we have a
widget at the top line colon, and then we
have widget objects. We have debug on
window. And then, another property would
be image. You can see the properties
of the image object inside the JSON
object. So this is just a structure.
This is a very... there's a syntax to it
and this is what MySQL will store in the
database and you can go in and sort
search on. You could do give me all
the documents inside the database that
have a widget.image.name of someone.
So, you could do something like that
and request all documents where it has
that image property of name set to
someone. So these are some of the
capabilities that you can do inside of
MySQL. Again, I'm not going. I think
this is still fairly niche with MySQL.
I'm not going to get into JSON
too much but I wanted you to be aware of
it. If you do have a need for it,
definitely let me know and I may expand
upon the JSON content for the MySQL
course.